# Anoma vis-a-vis Cosmos

Here we take Cosmos to be the protocol stack of CometBFT (nee Tendermint), the Cosmos SDK, and IBC. Anoma and Cosmos are both self-contained full-stack protocol designs, and they share a certain understanding of political polycentrism, or heterogeneous security, in that they design the protocols to facilitate communication between domains with different security models (in the Cosmos case often called "zones"). Anoma and Cosmos differ in where they bound the design requirements, what levels of the stack they standardise, and how they organise the protocol components. 

First, design requirements. The Cosmos stack provides interoperable settlement with CometBFT (nee Tendermint) and IBC, and aims to cater to blockchain developers, to whom the Cosmos SDK is provided as a framework for writing blockchain state machines. Counterparty discovery and further layers of application abstraction (e.g. CosmWASM) are left to zone developers. Anoma, by contrast, includes counterparty discovery in the protocol's design scope and aims to provide a platform directly for applications and application developers -- with an appropriately standardised protocol stack, Anoma does not expect the long-term existence of a separate class of blockchain developers, since the distinguishing factor of different blockchains will become no more than the identities of and trust in their validator sets.

Second, standardisation. Cosmos standardises consensus and inter-consensus communication, but leaves blockchain state machine design up to zone developers. Cosmos does not provide privacy to applications as part of the protocol stack, similarly leaving possible privacy features up to zone developers. Anoma standardises the entire protocol all the way up from the P2P layer, abstracting over physical networking hardware, to the application layer, providing a privacy-preserving state model and virtual machine directly to application developers. In Cosmos, applications and state are typically tied to a particular zone, with certain common abstractions (e.g. tokens) able to move over IBC. Standardisation of more protocol layers allows Anoma application logic and state to move freely across security domains and separates out decisions of which validator sets to trust, which can be made differently by different users for the same application.

Third, component organisation. Cosmos organises the protocol into three large layers: CometBFT (nee Tendermint), the Cosmos SDK, and IBC. Within those layers (with the partial exception of IBC), sub-layers and interfaces are typically tightly integrated and not cleanly separable. The separation of IBC from CometBFT (nee Tendermint) takes consensus as a black-box, so IBC must implement a separate overlay gossip network for inter-chain packet relay and rely on the operational support of a separate class of relayer operators who run software which relays packets from the CometBFT (nee Tendermint) gossip network for one zone to the gossip network for another. By contrast, Anoma splits the stack into cleanly separated layers, seperating out identity, content-addressed storage, content-addressed compute, P2P gossip, mempool, ordering, and execution, and application semantics into modular interfaces. Anoma also unifies inter-consensus messaging with consensus such that no separate overlay network or relayer software is required, and such that inter-consensus messaging can benefit from bounded latency and atomic execution guarantees possible only with the knowledge of which validators are signing what. Each Cosmos zone is a separately compiled program (typically importing Tendermint, the Cosmos SDK, and IBC) which is operated by a validator set who must be familiar with specifically that zone. Anoma, by contrast, is a single program which can be run by validators and automatically connect to and validate any number of "chains", depending on user demand for consensus amongst particular validator sets. Anoma splits apart data storage, delegated compute, and P2P operations so that individual operators may specialise their hardware and software without any requirement for a coordinated switch to a new version. 