# Cybernetics of coordination

Let us take _cybernetic_ systems to be those concerned with measurement and control of complex feedback processes. Cybernetic systems have a general character consisting of five parts:
- Some control inputs (which can be chosen)
- Some outputs (which can be measured)
- Some targets (which can be chosen)
- Some unknown function of system evolution
- Some strategy for adjusting the control inputs to seek the targeted outputs

Consider two examples, which may seem quite different but share this general character:
- In using your arm to pick up a glass of water, the control inputs are muscle movements, the outputs are the visible positions of parts of your arm, the target is the location of the glass of water, the function of system evolution is however your arm actually moves in response to different muscle movements, and the strategy is typically to adjust the inputs based on the observed difference of the outputs and the target.  
- In the Fed using interest rates to (attempt to) tame inflation, the control inputs are the Federal funds rates, the outputs are the inflation rates observed in the economy, the target is some low constant (per current doctrine, 2-3% per year), the function of system evolution is the product of innumerable choices in the real economy, and the strategy is typically to raise the funds rates until inflation goes down enough.

These examples are simple in that they feature a single primary agent and a small number of control inputs and measurable outputs. Consider now the case of money. As it is used in the modern economy, the system of money can be similarly understood as cybernetic in function: the control inputs are purchases or gifts, the outputs are whatever agents care about (perhaps material sustenance, happiness, a clean environment, etc.), the targets are reasonable values for all of the outputs, the function of system evolution is the flows in the real economy, and the strategy is... unclear. Although acting as a cybernetic system, money as it exists is an ineffective one, to first order perhaps because the choice of control inputs is not very free and the participants do not understand the function of the system as such. Resilience of a monetary system requires defense against arbitrary inflation and historical equivocation by Byzantine actors, and the present system of fiat currency enforces these by both a _de jure_ and _de facto_ monopoly on the use of force. As a matter of technical infrastructure, it also privileges fungible representations over non-fungible ones, leading to the use of the former in cases where the latter might be a more appropriate model of the world, and forgets intricate causal structure, including constraints and trade-offs between different measures of value.

In this sense, Anoma can be understood as a general multi-agent cybernetic substrate. By contrast to the current system of money, Anoma can model arbitrary causal structure, does not privilege any particular measure of value, enforces historical consistency with cryptography instead of force. Anoma avoids the problem of arbitrary inflation by decoupling the functions of medium-of-exchange, store-of-value, and unit-of-account, and building up a network graph of mutually consensual relationships to recover the scaling properties previously provided by fiat standardisation. As a multi-agent system, Anoma can combine local information about local causal dependence and agent preferences into a gestalt system model of causal and preference relations, and provide pairwise and relative measures of preference satisfaction (also known as _entanglement_) as outputs which can be used for resource provisioning decisions in the future. Different measures of entanglement can be fed back into the system to inform local choices which require trust, such as delegation of data storage and consensus provisioning, allowing for automatic reduction of computational resource expenditure in high-entanglement interactions. Anoma's architecture is _scale-invariant_, in that the system's fundamental unit of identity is closed under composition, so the system can model relational topologies spanning arbitrary levels of individuality. Under the assumption of an inverse-power law with regards to distance on the basis of economic interdependency, the network of real relations viewed from outside will take the form of a fractal, i.e. recurrence of form independent of scale.