# Anoma

Anoma is a privacy-preserving, distributed operating system. Like a typical operating system, Anoma is a platform on top of which applications can run. It provides memory isolation, inter-application communication, and execution. Unlike a typical operating system, Anoma is built for multi-party _intent-centric_ applications. An _intent_, so named because it conveys an intention, is a message sent by a user describing a preferred state of the system. After a user sends an intent, two phases take place: _counterparty discovery_ and _settlement_. In the _counterparty discovery_ phase, network participants examine and match compatible intents, forming transactions which enact particular state changes. Transactions then enter the _settlement_ phase for ordering, execution, and confirmation by consensus, after which users can read the updated state. To applications, Anoma provides a host environment, state model, and compiler toolchain which handle all of the complex parts of intent-centric, privacy-preserving, and distributed operation, allowing developers to focus on their application-specific logic and allowing all applications on Anoma to interoperate.

Anoma's multi-party intent-centric architecture is designed for applications concerned with coordination of socio-economic processes dealing with physical (finite) resources, distributed capabilities (freedom of action, and control over resources), and agreement between agents under conditions of heterogeneous trust. _Intents_ can be understood as cybernetic incarnations of the underlying human intentions or preferences, translated into computable predicates over possible states of the ledger. The protocol can be used to instantiate both a system of cybernetic coordination based on arbitrarily interdependent numerical (fungible) measures of value and one dealing purely in relations between actual and possible unique (non-fungible) objects, where fungibility can be understood as a lossy dimensionality reduction and the exact point on the spectrum between the two taken in practice may be determined by the practical computational cost tradeoffs.

Anoma preserves user-defined privacy by instantiating a substrate for _information flow control_, such that users of the protocol can diclose information only where, when, and to whom they choose to, and can reason about where, when, and to whom that information can go, subject to whatever trust assumptions the user is willing to make. In order to provide this substrate, Anoma makes use of many cryptographic constructions, including public key encryption, one-way hash functions, succinct non-interactive zero-knowledge proofs, distributed key generation, threshold encryption, and homomorphic encryption. The protocol is constructed in such a way as to abstract the underlying primitives by their information-theoretic properties, such that new primitives may be swapped in over time as better constructions are discovered and existing constructions are optimised.

Anoma draws upon and synthesises prior art in the broad areas of distributed ledger architecture, cybernetic systems design, monetary anthropology, and web-of-trust construction, and relies upon results, primitives, and constructions from the academic research fields of distributed systems, cryptography, computational complexity theory, information theory, algorithmic game theory, programming language theory, and category theory, among others. For the reader with expertise in one or more of these areas or fields, it may be helpful to understand Anoma in relation to them. Descriptions of some of these relational structures can be found in the [angles of approach](./angles-of-approach.md) section.

These documents describe Anoma. They are intended to be _complete_, in that enough is said to define precisely what a valid implementation of Anoma must do, and _minimal_, in that no more is said than that.

Anoma is free, in both the senses of "free speech" and "free beer". The source for these documents is [on Github](https://github.com/anoma/specs), permissively licensed, and they can be forked or edited as you like. At present, this particular repository is stewarded by the [Anoma Foundation](https://anoma.foundation/). Contributions are welcome.

> **NOTE:** For clarity, the word "Anoma" is used to refer to three separate but related entities:
> - The Anoma _protocol_, which is defined in this specification.
> - The Anoma _network_, which is the network of nodes using the Anoma protocol.
> - The Anoma _Foundation_, which is a Swiss foundation (Stiftung) chartered with support & coordination of the Anoma ecosystem.
> <br /><br />These documents describe the protocol only, not the network or the foundation. To learn more about the foundation, go [here](https://anoma.foundation).
> <br /><br />In these documents, the word "Anoma" alone refers to the Anoma protocol.

> **NOTE:** The clever reader may inquire as to what precisely we mean by "protocol". As the words are colloquially used, Anoma is closer to a "protocol architecture" or "protocol topology", in that it defines a class of protocols which are unique up to structural isomorphism. If a "protocol" in the TCP/IP sense can be said to consist of a structure and an encoding, where the structure is constrained by the acceptable assumptions and desired properties, but the encoding makes arbitrary decisions about symbolic representation, a "protocol" in the Anoma sense fixes the structure but not the encoding. Any program preserving this structure can be said to implement the Anoma protocol. Standardisation of an encoding is likely in practice, but strictly speaking not even required for distributed consensus - agents must only agree on the encoding and decoding functions on a per-message basis in order to "understand" each other. This disctinction may seem arcane, but it is potentially of great practical importance, for a few reasons:
> - A third party observing the cleartext part of the communications between two agents may not easily be able to detect whether or not they are even speaking the Anoma protocol if they do not know the specific encoding in use.
> - The Anoma protocol may be "disguised" as any sufficently general existing protocol (e.g. HTTP) in a way which cannot be automatically detected.
> - Censorship (where censorship is understood as prohibiting a specific string of symbols) of the Anoma protocol is physically impossible, because there are an infinite number of programs which implement the protocol correctly, and an infinite number of ways to encode and decode the structure in protocol messages.

> **NOTE:** These documents are not yet complete. If you're reading this page right now, there's a high chance you might be interested in [Namada](https://namada.net).

Happy reading!
